\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-

@set drgeoVersion 16.10
@settitle GNU Dr. Geo user guide
@setfilename drgeo.info
@documentlanguage en
@documentencoding UTF-8
@afourlatex

@copying
This manual is for GNU Dr.Geo (version @value{drgeoVersion}), an
environment for interactive geometry and programming.

Copyright @copyright{} 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012,
2015, 2016 Hilaire Fernandes

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title Dr. Geo, be a geometer 
@subtitle The GNU interactive geometry, version @value{drgeoVersion}
@author Hilaire Fernandes (@email{hilaire@@drgeo.eu})
@author Edward Cherlin (@email{echerlin@@gmail.com})
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@include ../drgeoMacro.texinfo

@shortcontents
@contents

@node Top
@ifnottex
@top @drgeo
User guide @drgeo (version @value{drgeoVersion})
@end ifnottex 

@menu
* Introduction::                What is Dr. Geo?
* Basic functionality::         Description of the tools used to construct sketch
* Files and documents::         How to save Dr. Geo document?
* Advanced features::           How to use the Dr. Geo advanced features?
* Macro-construction::          How to teach Dr. Geo new constructions?    
* Smalltalk script::            How to insert code in sketch?
* Smalltalk sketch::            How to describe a sketch with code?
* Didactic applications::       How to use code and script for didactic applications?
* Various tips::                Learn about the programming environment
* Glossary::
* GNU Free Documentation License::
* Index::
@end menu

@c==================================================
@c:INTRODUCTION
@include Introduction/introduction.texinfo
@c==================================================
@c:PART1 -- Getting Started
@part Partie I @*Getting started
@c:Basic
@include BasicFunctionalities/basic.texinfo
@c:Files and Documents
@include FilesAndDocuments/files.texinfo
@c==================================================
@c:PART 2 -- Advanced functionalities
@c:Intro
@part Partie II @*Advanced functionalities
@include AdvancedFunctionalities/advanced.texinfo
@c:Macro construction
@include MacroConstruction/macro.texinfo
@c:Smalltalk Script
@include SmalltalkScript/SmalltalkScript.texinfo
@c:Smalltalk figure
@include SmalltalkFigure/SmalltalkFigure.texinfo
@c==================================================
@c:PART3 -- Application
@part Partie III @*Applications
@c:Didactic examples
@include DidacticExamples/didactics.texinfo
@c:Various Tips
@include VariousTips/tips.texinfo
@c==================================================
@c:END OF THE BOOK

@include Glossary/glossary.texinfo
@include ../fdl.texinfo

@node Index
@unnumbered Conceptual index
@printindex cp
@unnumbered Method index
@printindex fn

@bye
