@c Files and documents

@node Files and documents
@chapter Files and documents

Sketches are saved in two different ways, one sketch per file or a set
of sketches and macro constructions in one file (i.e. a @drgeo{}
session). We recall that documents are saved with the extension
@strong{.fgeo}. When providing the file name, you don't need to write
this extension. @drgeo{} will do it for you.

@cindex sketch, rename
@section Rename a sketch
From the menu @clicksequence{File@click{}Change title}, the user
changes the name and the title of the active window. This function is
useful when the user saves a set of sketches in a single session file.

@cindex sketch, save
@section Save a sketch

From the menu @clicksequence{File@click{}Save}, the sketch of the
active window is saved. The user is prompted for a name.

@c Bug: Dr. Geo will not save an edited sketch in the same file. The 
@c user has to enter the name each time the sketch is saved. This 
@c results in multiple sketches with the same name. There is no way to 
@c delete the old sketch files from within Dr. Geo.
@c
@c ** It should not be the case **


@drgeoNote{@drgeo{} can work with several sketches at the same time.
  The user switches from one sketch to another one with the task bar
  in the bottom of the @drgeo{} environment.}

With the menu @clicksequence{File@click{}Save as...}, the user saves the
document under another name.

The documents are saved in the @drgeo{} application structure, in the
folder @t{DrGeo.app/MySketches}. To save at an arbitrary location in
the hard disk structure, use the menu @clicksequence{File@click{}Save
at...}

@cindex sketch, save, network 
@cindex share, network, sketch
@cindex network, share, sketch
@drgeoNote{When saving a document, a network option is available in
  the dialog box. If selecting this option, the user must also provide
  a network share name -- arbitrarily chosen by the user -- and the
  document name. This option lets a group of networked users share
  sketches}


@cindex sketch, export
@section Export a sketch
The menu @clicksequence{File@click{}Export as bitmap} exports the
sketch of the active window in a picture file in the standard format
PNG@footnote{@url{http://www.w3.org/Graphics/PNG}}.

The pictures are saved in the @drgeo{} structure application, in the
folder @t{DrGeo.app/MyExports}.


@cindex macro construction, save
@cindex session, save
@cindex sketch, save, session
@section Save a session

A session is a set of @drgeo{} documents -- sketches and
macro constructions -- the user saves in @strong{one} file. It eases
the preparation of pedagogical sequences.

From the menu @clicksequence{File@click{}Save multiple}, the users
accesses a dialog box to select the document to integrate in the
session file.

@drgeoFigure{The @drgeo{} session dialog box,fig51,8}

In this dialog, the list of all active documents is presented in
column. Each line is prefixed with a tag @t{Fig.} or @t{Macro}
according to the document type. The second part is the name of the
document.

@drgeoNote{As for now, a session knows about two types of document: 2D
  interactive sketch and macro construction.}

The user selects the documents to integrate in the session then 
provides a name for the composite file, and clicks @clicksequence{OK}.

@drgeoNote{The menu @clicksequence{File@click{}Save multiple} is the
only method for saving a macro construction in a file.}


@cindex macro construction, save
@section Save a macro construction

To save one or several macro constructions in a file, proceed the 
same way as for saving a session -- multiple save. From the dialog 
box to save a session, select one or several macro construction to 
save, then input the file name. That's all.

Therefore, it is possible to build macro construction libraries, one
per file or several per file following a given theme.

@cindex macro construction, open
@cindex session, open
@cindex sketch, open
@section Open a file

Whenever the user saved an individual sketch or a session in a file,
the procedure to open it is the same from the menu
@clicksequence{File@click{}Open}.

If the session contains macro constructions, they are automatically
added to the macro menus and player, ready to use in any existing
@drgeo{} window.
