@c Macro construction

@node Macro-construction
@anchor{macroConstruction}
@chapter Macro Construction
@cindex macro construction, introduction

A macro construction is similar to a programmed procedure or
function, receiving as input items from the sketch and providing as
outputs another set of items in the sketch. A macro is built
according to a model defined by the user. That means that the user
first needs to do the complete construction sequence in the sketch,
then ask to @drgeo{} to record it in a macro construction. The macro
construction can then be replayed and saved in a file like any sketch.

To record a construction sequence, @drgeo{} needs to know the initial
items of the sequence and the final -- output -- items. Of course, the
final items must depend @emph{only} on the input items, otherwise
@drgeo{} cannot deduce the final items from the initial ones.

Thus, @drgeo{} traces the logic of the construction sequence for the
specified outputs, and records it in a macro construction. Then, the
user can repeat this sequence. When playing the macro construction, it
only asks for the initial items -- of the types specified -- in the
sketch and constructs the resulting -- output -- items.

@drgeoNote{Intermediate invisible items are constructed by the macro
construction. They are necessary to reproduce to complete the
construction sequence and the resulting output items.}

To illustrate the use of a macro construction, we take the example of
a circle going through three points.

@drgeoFigure{The initial sketch,fig40,4}

@cindex macro construction, create

Before creating the macro construction, the user has to construct the
final sketch to serve as a model, as shown in the figure below. 

@drgeoFigure{The sketch with the final construction,fig41,4}

@section Creating a macro construction

The user now tells @drgeo{} he wants to define a macro construction 
from this sequence. 

He activates the function @clicksequence{Build a macro} from the
toolbar @drgeoIcon{fig26} or from the menu @clicksequence{macro
construction@click{}Build macro}.

In the newly displayed dialog box, the user selects the input and
output objects, and enters a name and description of the
macro construction.


@drgeoFigure{Introduction page in the dialog box to construct a macro
  construction,fig42,8}

The second page in the dialog box lets the user select the input
objects. In our example, it is the three initial points. The user
just needs to go to this second page and then click on the three points
A, B and C in the sketch. The selected points blink and the names are
displayed in the dialog box.

@drgeoFigure{The second page with the three points selected,fig43,8}

In the third page, the user selects the output objects. In our
example, we want the circle and its centre as the result of the macro
construction. The user clicks on these two objects in the sketch. When
selected they blink, and their names are displayed in the dialog box.

@drgeoFigure{The third page with the circle and the centre
selected,fig44,8}

In the fourth page, the user inputs a name and a description for the
macro construction. This information is displayed when the user plays
a macro construction. It helps to disambiguate macro constructions.

@drgeoFigure{The fourth page with the name and description of the
macro construction,fig45,8}

Next, the user validates the definition of the macro construction by
pressing the @t{Apply} button and examining the results. He can also
step back to the previous steps to adjust the parameter objects.


@drgeoNote{If the selections of the input and output objects do not
  match (@drgeo{} cannot extract a construction sequence, because an 
  output depends on an object not selected as an input), the macro 
  construction cannot be created. In this case the user needs to 
  reconsider the input and output parameters. He or she can step 
  back to the second or third page in the dialog box to adjust the 
  choices.}


A this stage, the macro construction is created and recorded in
@drgeo{}. In the next section, we will see how to use it.


@cindex macro construction, execute
@section Play a macro construction

@cindex macro construction, execute, dialog box
@subsection With the dialog box

To execute a macro construction, the user clicks on the
@drgeoIcon{fig27} button in the toolbar or selects the menu
@clicksequence{macro construction@click{}Execute macro} in the sketch
window. A dialog box describing the procedure appears.

On the second page of this dialog box the user selects the 
macro construction in the upper list, and then the input parameters 
in the sketch. Once all are selected, the macro construction is 
executed automatically and the output parameters are built and 
displayed in the sketch.

@drgeoFigure{The user selects the input parameters in the
sketch,fig46,8}

In our example, the macro construction expects three input parameters
(three points) and constructs a circle and its centre. Therefore, to
execute it, you need a sketch with at least three points.

@drgeoFigure{Sketch with three points,fig47,3}

Once we feed three points to the macro we get the expected circle
and centre.

@drgeoFigure{A final sketch with the circle and its centre,fig48,3}

@cindex macro construction, execute, menu

@subsection With the macro construction menu 

The macro construction loaded in memory are listed in the window menu
@clicksequence{macro construction}. Selecting a macro construction
from this menu let you execute it directly. After choosing one in the
menu, select the input parameters in the sketch. The macro
construction is executed as soon as all the input parameters are
selected.

It is a dialog-less mode of execution.

@c A brief section on storing, loading, and importing 
@c macro constructions is needed here, referring to the Files and 
@c documents chapter.

As described in the Files and documents chapter, to save a macro or
collection of macros to a single file, select
@clicksequence{File@click{} Save multiple}, and then select the items
to include in the saved file.  The same process works for saving a
sketch with multiple macros.

To add a macro from a saved file to a sketch, create or open the sketch
and open a file containing just the macro. 
