@c Smalltalk script

@node Smalltalk script
@anchor{script}
@chapter @drgeo{} Smalltalk script
@cindex script, introduction

@drgeo{} is a dynamic application written in Pharo Smalltalk. This
means that it is possible to modify it within itself as it is
running. We have exploited this feature with the
@clicksequence{Numerics@click{}Use a script} command to define sketch items in
@drgeo{} which are in fact Smalltalk scripts -- code snippets -- to
extend the possibilities of @drgeo{} dynamically, without limit. But
what exactly is Smalltalk?

@quotation
Smalltalk is an object-oriented, dynamically typed, reflective
programming language. Smalltalk was created as the language to
underpin the "new world" of computing exemplified by "human–computer
symbiosis." It was designed and created in part for educational use,
more so for constructionist learning, at the Learning Research Group
(LRG) of Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC) by Alan Kay, Dan
Ingalls, Adele Goldberg, Ted Kaehler, Scott Wallace, and others during
the 1970s.  The language was first generally released as Smalltalk-80.
Smalltalk-like languages are in continuing active development, and
have gathered loyal communities of users around them. ANSI Smalltalk
was ratified in 1998 and represents the standard version of
Smalltalk.@footnote{Wikipedia Smalltalk article
(@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smalltalk}). Page view the 24 Jully
2013. Contents under the license CC-BY-SA 3.0
(@url{http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/deed.fr}).}
@end quotation

In this definition, object-oriented means that everything in 
Smalltalk is an object defined in a class, with its behavior 
determined by methods defined in that class. This is in contrast 
with the notion of a variable associated with a data type in most 
programming languages, where the type system sets few limits on what 
can be done with values. 

In statically typed languages, the type of a variable has to be
declared before it can be used, and that type cannot be changed within
the program. In particular, the sizes of arrays and other composite
data structures must be declared in advance. In dynamically typed
languages, a variable name can be repurposed to refer to an object of
a different class with a simple assignment, items can be added to or
removed from data structures at will, and the class definition can be
changed while a program is running.

Reflection in programming languages refers to the ability to examine 
and modify properties of objects within the live system, rather than 
having to read the source code in which variables are declared to 
determine their types and infer their properties. Reflection tools 
in Smalltalk include the system browser, the inspector, the object 
explorer, and the method finder.

This abstract from the book preface @emph{Pharo By
Example}@footnote{@url{http://pharobyexample.org}} describes the
Smalltalk environment used by @drgeo{}:

@quotation
Pharo is a modern Open Source development environment for the classic
Smalltalk-80 programming language.

Pharo strives to offer a lean, Open Source platform for professional
software development, and a robust and stable platform for research
and development into dynamic languages and environments.
@end quotation

@drgeo{} uses the Smalltalk environment to create a comfortable
environment for writing scripts providing access to the programming
interfaces for geometric objects. These interfaces are the set of
methods in the definitions of the types of the objects.

Thus the user can write scripts to manipulate the sketch items, and 
as scripts pinned in the sketch are also sketch items, they do not 
need to be in separate files, but can be saved in the sketch file.

@c This requires substantial clarification.

Scripts are not edited as sketch items but as methods stored 
globally in Smalltalk. Using a script and pinning the result in a 
sketch makes it part of the sketch so that it can be saved and 
reloaded with the sketch. However, there is no way to keep scripts 
in different sketches separate if they are open at the same time. 
This is a design bug, because users will often have all of their 
work polluted with scripts meant to be used in other sketches, 
unless they exercise great care to avoid this. In fact, the default 
state of @drgeo{} contains a number of useless scripts that could have 
been put into the examples category or even omitted, so that any new 
session would start with an empty scripts category.

A workaround is to close @drgeo{} and open a new session after working 
with a sketch containing multiple scripts and before creating any 
new sketch, which can then begin without any extraneous scripts.

@c Can we talk about creating a subclass for each sketch, and 
@c grouping scripts in the Use a script dialog box by sketch?

@c Also, what is the private category for? I don't see it explained
@c anywhere in this manual.

While it is possible to put scripts for a sketch into a new category
for creating them, it is not possible to select by category when using
a script. Furthermore, in the use a script dialog, scripts seem to be
offered in random order. It is certainly not alphabetical or temporal
order.

Scripts in @drgeo{} are executed in the Pharo Smalltalk environment.
The user thus benefits from the excellent developer tools of the
environment: class browser, inspector, debugger, etc. The user wishing
to explore the power of scripts is invited to study the book
@emph{Pharo By Example}, where he or she will learn the Smalltalk
language and its environment.


For our purposes in this chapter, it is necessary mainly to understand
how to use a Workspace. Open a new Workspace by clicking in the
background and selecting @clicksequence{Tools@click{}Workspace}. The
workspace provides

@itemize
  @item Basic text editing capability
  @item Syntax highlighting
  @item Context-sensitive selector (method name) completion
  @item Access to a menu of editing commands and development tools
@end itemize

Text editing capabilities in a Workspace consist of the usual Cut,
Copy, and Paste; Find and Replace; Undo and Do again. An Extended
search function displays information about selected items using
various development tools. There are also Accept and Cancel
functions. Typing in the Workspace causes a highlight to appear at
the upper right of the window. Accept checkpoints the contents of
the window, empties the undo stack, and causes the highlight to
disappear. Editing and then cancelling takes the window back to the
last checkpoint without having to undo each action individually.

When editing, object names appear in blue, method names and symbols
such as := in black, and unrecognized text in red. This includes
incomplete names, undeclared local variables, and also syntax
errors. When the user is typing a selector, a menu appears showing
selectors starting with the typed text that are usable in the
current context, that is, for the object that will receive this
message. Move up or down in the menu with the arrow keys, and accept
the highlighted selector by pressing the tab key. If the selector
has more than one part, all of the parts are entered into the
workspace.

Development tools provided on the workspace menu, accessed by
right-clicking in the workspace, are

@itemize
  @item @strong{Do it} Execute the selected text or the current line
  otherwise

  @item @strong{Print it} Execute text and display the result.

  @item @strong{Inspect it} Open an Inspector on a selected class
  name, or execute selected text and open an Inspector on the results.

  @item @strong{Explore it} Open an object Explorer on a selected
  class name, or execute selected text and open an Explorer on the
  results.

  @item @strong{Debug it} Open a Debugger on selected code.

  @item @strong{Profile it} Open a Profiler on selected code.
@end itemize

Development tools accessible in the Extended search menu are the
following.

@itemize
  @item @strong{browse it}
  @item @strong{senders of it}
  @item @strong{references to it}
  @item @strong{selectors containing it}
  @item @strong{method strings with it}
  @item @strong{method source with it}
  @item @strong{class names containing it}
  @item @strong{class comments with it}
  @item @strong{change sets with it}
@end itemize

Each one opens the tool specified on the text selected or on an object
that that text names, if any. If there is none, a message may appear
saying so.

Some of the functions of these development tools can be discovered
through exploration, clicking on every button to see what happens.
For further details see Pharo Smalltalk documentation.

@cindex script, examples
@section Script by the example

@cartouche
@strong{WARNING:} THE FOLLOWING SECTIONS ARE OBSOLETE AND NEED TO BE
SYNCHRONISED WITH THE FRENCH USER GUIDE
@end cartouche

There are two phases to using scripts:

@itemize
  @item creating the script
  @item inserting the script in a sketch one or more times with
  different parameters
@end itemize

The tool to create or edit a script is on the menu
@clicksequence{Numeric@click{}Edit a script}. It is also reachable
from the toolbar.

The tool to use a script is on the menu
@clicksequence{Numeric@click{}Use a script}. It is also reachable from
the toolbar.

A script can be defined to receive 0 or more arguments (input
parameters). After selecting a script to insert in the sketch, the
user clicks on the items used as arguments. Then a final click
somewhere in the background sets the location for the returned value.

In the following section, we present a few script examples so that the
function and power of scripting will be more easily understood.  The
script and the macro construction give a special dimension to @drgeo{}
-- with a different positioning@footnote{A macro construction is
geometry oriented whereas a script is numerically/computation
oriented.} -- to let the user go into areas that the software was not
initially planned for.

It is important to understand that most Pharo Smalltalk resources are
accessible in scripts. This is particularly true for the class and
method libraries@footnote{For example, mathematical functions.}, which
we will use a lot.

@subsection Script without parameter
@cindex script, parameter(s), 0


@heading First example:
@cindex script, examples, simple

The procedure to create a script without an input parameter is as follows:

@enumerate
@item @strong{Edit the script}

  @enumerate
  @item Select @clicksequence{Numeric@click{}Edit a script} in the menu to open
    the script editor:

    @drgeoFigure{@anchor{scriptEditor}Script editor,fig35,8}
    
    Within the script editor window there are three panes:
    
    @itemize
    @item In the top left, the script categories to keep in good
      order: @t{examples}, @t{private}, and
      @t{scripts}. It is in this last one that you put your scripts.
    @item In the top right, the script names in the selected
      category. When selecting one, its source code is displayed
      in the editor pane at the bottom.
    @item In the bottom, the source code editor for the selected
      script. It is there you create or modify the scripts. To
      accept a modification, press the keyboard keys
      @kbd{Ctrl-s}.
    @end itemize
    
  @item In the script editor, select the category @t{scripts}.  The
    text editor in the bottom will display a script source code
    template (@xref{scriptEditor}).

  @item Input the source code as below (@xref{firstScript}):

    @example
      myFirstScript
      "Hello, World is the traditional first program in any language.
      It simply displays a text message."
         ^ 'Hello, World!'.
    @end example

	Save the script with @kbd{Ctrl-s}. @drgeo{} will ask 
	your last name and first name to track the history of the script 
	modifications. @c  This does not happen.
	The first script line, @t{myFirstScript} is 
	the name of the script, followed by the source code. It is 
	followed by an optional comment of one or more lines between 
	quotation marks. The comment should usually explain the purpose 
	of the script, what are the expected parameters, and what are 
	the conditions for its use. We strongly encourage you to 
	document carefully to prevent confusion and error.

    @drgeoFigure{@anchor{firstScript}My first script,fig38,8}
    
    The script editor can now be closed.
  @end enumerate

@item @strong{Using the script in the sketch}@*
  Select @clicksequence{Numeric@click{}Use a script} in the menu. In the
  displayed dialogue box, choose the script
  @t{myFirstScript}. Note: each time a script is selected, its
  descriptive comment is displayed in the bottom of the dialogue.

  @drgeoFigure{Select a script,fig50,8}

  Once the script selected, click on the sketch at the place to pin 
  it. In this example the script only returns the message ``@tie{} Hello, 
  World@tie{}!@tie{}''. The returned value is always printed in the sketch. If 
  necessary it is converted to a text representation.

@end enumerate

In the following examples, we only give the source code of the
Smalltalk scripts. To use them in @drgeo{}, just follow the steps
explained previously.


@cindex script, @t{random value}
@heading A random number generator and more:

If you need a simple random generator for numbers between 1 and 10, 
the following script exactly does that:

@example
random
"I return a random number continuously updated"
   ^ 10 atRandom.
@end example

@c  "Answer a random integer from 1 to self picked from aGenerator."

At each sketch update, it generates a different random number in the
interval [1@tie{};@tie{}10]. Updates occur when the sketch is changed by 
dragging an object.

In case you prefer a random decimal number in the interval [0@tie{};@tie{}1], use
this script:
@example
random2
"I return a random decimal number continuously updated from 0 to 1"
   ^ (101 atRandom -1) / 100.
@end example


Some details:
  @itemize
  @item The value returned by the script is the result of the
    expression after the @strong{^ }.
  @item The returned value can be of any class. @drgeo{} prints its text 
  representation (a string).
  @item To return the value of a variable, it is enough to
    put its name after the symbol @strong{^ }.
  @end itemize

@heading Calculate common values

To access an approximate value of @emph{pi} with the maximum precision
available in Smalltalk:
@example
pi
   ^ Float pi
@end example

This returns 3.141592653589793.

or @emph{e} :
@example
e
   ^ Float e
@end example

This returns 2.718281828459045.

These returned values are usable in the same way as any other value 
generated by @drgeo{}. Even for such small things, the script is your 
friend. But it can do much more interesting things when it receives 
input parameters.

Indeed, so far the scripts have had no arguments, so that it was not 
necessary to select items in the sketch when inserting the script in 
the construction. Of course the real interest in scripts comes from 
returning the values of numerical computation, pinned in the sketch 
for use with other constructions or scripts. In the following 
sections we show the use of scripts in a cascade.

@subsection Script with one input parameter
@cindex script, parameter(s), 1

The procedure to create a script with one input parameter is mostly 
the same:

@enumerate

@item When editing the script (@clicksequence{Numeric@click{}Edit a
script}), the argument is inserted in the first line with the script
name.@*

For example to calculate the distance from the origin to a point, we
write the following script:
  
@example
distanceToOrigin: item 
"Return the distance from origin to a point"
   ^ item point dist: 0@@0
@end example

A few explanations:
@itemize

@item @t{item} is the argument of our script, which must be a 
  point. It is in fact an instance of the class @t{DrGPointItem} 
  @footnote{To learn about the protocol of this class, write its name 
  in a workspace, select it with the mouse then press the keys
  @kbd{Ctrl-b}. A class browser opens on this class 
  to navigate in its protocol and source code.}


@item @t{DrGPointItem} has an instance method @t{#point}
  returning its coordinates. Thus from the argument we can extract
  information, here its coordinates, and calculate with it.

@item @t{0@@0} is an instance of the class @t{Point} with
  coordinates (0,0).
@item @t{#dist:} is a keyword message @footnote{As we can see
    because its name ends in ``:''} from the class
  @t{Point} expecting as its unique argument another instance of
  @t{Point}. It calculates the distance between these two
  instances. It can be understood as: ``distance between item point
  and (0,0)''. The keyword message syntax is very specific to Smalltalk.
  The arguments are declared in the message name line of a method.
@end itemize

@item To use a script (@clicksequence{Numeric@click{}Use a script}), @drgeo{}
  expects from the user to click on appropriate objects, then 
  somewhere in the sketch.@* 

  @strong{Attention}: If an item other than a point is selected when a
  point is expected, @drgeo{} throws an error, opening a debugger
  window stating the problem and offering further information. The
  debugger window can be safely closed. To continue, select the script
  again.  

@end enumerate


Depending on the type of argument received by the script, various
methods are available: to get its value, its coordinate, etc. A list
of the methods you can use is presented below (@xref{api-dgs}).


@subsection Script with two input parameters:
@cindex script, parameter(s), 2

Let's say we want to calculate the distance between two points. To 
do so we create a script with two input parameters inserted on the 
name line of the script. We name it @t{distance:to:}, where 
each ``:'' indicates the place of the parameter. Therefore in the 
script editor we write the following source code:


@example
distance: item1 to: item2
"Calculate the distance between two points"
   ^ item1 point dist: item2 point
@end example

@t{item1} and @t{item2} are the names of the two parameters, 
which can be chosen freely.  To use this script, proceed as in the 
previous example: select two points in the construction and click 
somewhere in the sketch to pin the result of the script.


@subsection Detailed example with several scripts
@cindex script, examples, complex
@cindex script, curve, tangent


In the following section, we present a more complex sketch,
integrating a cascading use of scripts to construct the curve of a
function and its tangent at a mobile point of the curve.

The final sketch is in the @drgeo{} folder @t{examples}. It is
named @t{Curve and slope.fgeo}.


@drgeoFigure{Curve and tangent to a point,fig55,10}

In a new empty sketch, we construct a horizontal segment, then add to
this segment a free point named ``Move me!''. This point will be the
base to construct the curve as a locus.


@cindex script, function

@heading Define a function: A script can return any type of object,
so that our first construction simply defines a function. To do so, we
use a Smalltalk object named block of code (an anonymous function in
Scheme and some other languages). We name this script
@t{myFunction}, without parameter:

@example
myFunction
"Definition of our function"
   ^ [:x | x cos]
@end example

Next we insert the function in the sketch@footnote{It is important to
add it to the construction to get it included in the file when the
sketch is saved.} So the block of code returned by @t{myFunction}
expects one argument @t{:x} and it returns the cosine of that
argument. We see later how to manipulate this script.

@cindex script, function, image
@cindex script, coordinates, point
@anchor{scriptCoordinates}
@heading Image of a value by function:

Now we calculate the coordinates of a point on the curve. We use our
point ``Move me!'' abscissa and our function previously defined. Our
script will have one unique point argument; as we will see we do not
need to pass @t{myFunction} as argument:

@example
pointM: item
"Return a point on the curve of myFunction and driven by item point"
   ^ item point x @@(self myFunction value: item point x)
@end example

The point returned by this script has the same abscissa as the 
argument, and its ordinate is the image of that abscissa by the 
function.

Note:
@itemize
@item the direct access to the function: @t{self myFunction},
@item the way to pass an argument to this block of code, which can be
  understood as @t{myFunction(item point x)}.
@end itemize

Now we use this script @t{pointM:} with the point ``Move me!'' 
as argument; the result of this script is of the form @t
{1.2@@0.5} representing a pair of coordinates.

With the tool @drgeoIcon{fig7}, @clicksequence{Points@click{}Coordinates}, we
create a point with its coordinates specified by the result of this
script.

@cindex locus, script 

The locus tool @drgeoIcon{fig14}, @clicksequence{Lines@click{}Locus}, gives the
curve after selecting our two points.

@heading Slope at a point of the function's curve:

We calculate an approximation of the slope at a given point thus:

p = (f(x + 0.001) - f(x)) / 0.001

This is directly translated in the script @t{slope:} with a single
argument, the point at which to approximate the slope:

@example
slope: item
"Compute the slope at the given x point position for myFunction"
| f  x |
   f := self myFunction.
   x := item point x.
   ^ (f value: x + 0.001) - (f value: x) / 0.001
@end example

Next we insert this script in the construction.

Note:
@itemize
@item The declaration of temporary variables @t{| f x |}. As
  explained variables are not typed, so only the name is required.
@item A reference to a block of code in a variable @t{f := self
    myFunction}. The symbol to assign a value to a variable is
  ``@t{:=}''.
@item The parenthesis! Smalltalk has no concept of operator priority; in
  fact operators do not exist in this language. The reader is 
  encouraged to study the section about Smalltalk messages in 
  the book @emph{Pharo By Example}.
@end itemize


@cindex script, examples, tangent to a curve
@heading Calculate and display the tangent to a curve:

To construct our tangent we need two points: one on the curve -- we
have it already -- and a second one on the line. For this last one we
use the previously calculated slope. Let's write a second script
computing this second point's coordinates:

@example
pointN: item
"Given an initial point, calculate the coordinates 
of a point on the tangent"
| p x |
   p := self slope: item.
   x := item point x + 1.
   ^ x @ (item point y + p)
@end example


With the protocol of the class @t{Point} -- message @t{+}
sent to a point -- this script can be written in one line:

@example
pointN: item
"Given an initial point, calculate the coordinates 
of a point on the tangent"
   ^ item point + (1@@ (self slope: item))
@end example

We use this script with argument the point on the curve. We get as
result the coordinates of the second point on the tangent. With these
inputs we construct the second point@footnote{Tool
@clicksequence{Points@click{}Coordinates}}. The tangent is the line
defined by this point and the point on the curve.

When moving the point ``Move me!'', the tangent is recomputed. 
Equally interesting: modifying the script @t{myFunction} 
updates the whole construction accordingly. A few examples of 
modifications to this script:

@example
   ^ [:x | x * x / 10]

   ^ [:x | x cos + (10 * x) sin]

   ^ [:x | (x * 5) cos + x abs]
@end example
  
@section Reference methods for @drgeo{} scripts
@anchor{api-dgs}

@c  DGS API is exposed here

An argument passed to a script is always a reference to an instance of
a class from the hierarchy @t{DrGMathItem},the base class of
all items used in a construction. So to know about the messages you
can send to an argument passed to a script, it is wise to examine the
hierarchy of @t{DrGMathItem}. It contains more than 80 classes,
but because of class inheritance, only a few classes are interesting to
explore:

@itemize
@item @t{DrGMathItem}
@item @t{DrGpointItem}
@item @t{DrGDirectionItem} for segment, line, ray, vector
@item @t{DrGArcItem}
@item @t{DrGCircleItem}
@item @t{DrGLocus2ptsItem}
@item @t{DrGPolygonNptsItem}
@item @t{DrGValueItem}
@end itemize

To explore these classes, open a workspace -- @kbd{Ctrl-k}
after a click in the background of the environment -- input and mouse
select the class name to explore then press the shortcut
@kbd{Ctrl-b} to open a class browser on it.

The following sections contain descriptions of some useful messages, 
ordered by class.

@subsection Math Item

The protocol of the class @t {DrGMathItem} concerns all types 
of argument passed to a script.

@deftypemethod DrGMathItem <String> safeName
  @result{} text representing the item name
  @example
name := point1 safeName.
^ name asUppercase.
@end example
@end deftypemethod

@c  It is not at all obvious to the learner how this API is used.
@c  Here is what might happen when someone with limited experience in
@c  Smalltalk tries to discover how it works.
@c 
@c  The above code fails when executed in a workspace.
@c  name := point1 safeName.  doIt
@c  DrGeoUserScripts(Object)    doesNotUnderstand: #safeName
@c 
@c  point1 class printIt UndefinedObject
@c 
@c  Well, let's try it in a script
@c 
@c  test
@c ^self safeName
@c 
@c  Use script, pick point
@c  DrGeoUserScripts(Object)    doesNotUnderstand: #safeName
@c  Message    SentTo:

@c  test: point
@c  ^self class
@c 
@c  DrGeoUserScript
@c 
@c  Yes, self is not what we want, so create a selector and have it
@c  apply to an item in the sketch. Yes, that works.

To use this method in a script, create a @drgeo{} math item and give it a
name with the style function. Then create the script

@example
myName: item
^item safeName
@end example

and use it as usual, clicking on the point and then a place to put 
the result. Note that changing the name of the item and then forcing 
an update, for example by moving the item, updates the result of the 
script.

@deftypemethod DrGMathItem <Boolean> exist
  @result{} boolean indicating whether the item exists in the 
  current state of the sketch

@c  This requires more explanation. If I apply it to an item, I get the
@c  result true. If I delete the item, the script that depends on it is
@c  also deleted. How do I apply this method to an object that does not
@c  exist, for which there is no such value?
@c 
@c  exist is an instance variable for any DrGMathItem. It can be set to
@c  false with the exist: method. What would be the purpose of doing that?

  @example
line exist ifTrue: [ position := line origin ].
@end example
@end deftypemethod

@deftypemethod DrGMathItem <Collection> parents
  @result{} collection of the parents of this item
  @example
point1 := segment parents first.
@end example
@end deftypemethod

In this example, the parents of a segment joining two points are 
returned as an array containing the two points. In contrast, the 
parents of a free point are returned as nil.

@defmethod DrGMathItem move: vector
@var{vector}, a vector (x,y) representing the displacement

Move an item in a given direction, if possible while respecting its
constraints.

@example
circle move: 2@@1.
@end example
@end defmethod

@deftypemethod DrGMathItem <Point> closestPointTo: aPoint
  @var{aPoint}, coordinates
  @result{} coordinates of the point  on ``curve'' the closest to ``aPoint''.

This works when the curve is a line, a segment, a vector, an arc, a
circle, a polygon, or a locus.

@example
position := segment closestPointTo: 2@@1.
[..]
position := arc closestPointTo: 2@@1.
@end example
@end deftypemethod

@c  I tried it with a circle and a point, and got an error.
@c  DrGPointFreeItem(Object)    doesNotUnderstand: #-
@c  when calling DrGCircle2ptsItem(DrGCircleItem)    closestPointTo:
@c 
@c  Same problem with a segment and a point.
@c 
@c  Oh, I get it. Pick the point first. Does that mean that the arguments
@c  are assigned in reverse order? Testing...Nope. That means that
@c  something else is backwards.
@c  No, it's worse than that. I get the coordinates of the point selected,
@c  not the nearest point on the curve.
@c 
@c  Aha!
@c  I have to apply the point method to the point, which therefore
@c  cannot be named point. And I do get to pick the curve first.
@c 
@c  closestPointof: curve to: item
@c  "Closest point of a given curve to a given point"
@c  ||
@c  ^circle closestPointTo: item point.
@c 
@c  It does work with different curve types, including locus.
@c 
@c  Asking for the closest point of a circle to its center results in
@c  a Divide By Zero error.
@c 
@c  Report as bug.

@subsection Point

A point item -- point object defined in a @drgeo{} construction --
passed as argument to a script is a complex object. It can be a
free point on the plane, on a line, an intersection, etc. A few methods
can be useful in scripts.

@deftypemethod DrGPointItem <Point> point
 @result{} coordinates of this item
 @example
abscissa := pointItem point x.
@end example
@end deftypemethod

For example, with this script

@example
showOrdinate: aDrGeoPoint
"ordinate of point"
   ^ aDrGeoPoint point y
@end example

The user would invoke this script, pick a point, and pin the result in
the sketch showing the ordinate of the selected point.

@defmethod DrGPointItem point: aPoint
  @var{aPoint}, coordinates

  @result{} modify the coordinate of ``item''
@example
pointItem point: 5@@2.
@end example
@end defmethod

@c  Further explanation is needed.
@c  When I apply this to a point, I get a script item reading
@c  Point (5 ; 2)
@c  The point it is applied to does not relocate when the script is used,
@c  but waits until the next update.
@c 
@c  Report as bug.

@deftypemethod DrGPointOnCurveItem <Float> abscissa
  @result{} curvilinear abscissa of this point, in the interval [0@tie{};@tie{}1] 
  @example
a := pointItem abscissa.
@end example
@end deftypemethod

@defmethod DrGPointOnCurveItem abscissa: a
  @var{a}, decimal number in the interval [0@tie{};@tie{}1] 

  @result{} modify the curvilinear abscissa of a free point on a line
  @example
pointItem abscissa: 0.5.
@end example
@end defmethod

@defmethod DrGPointItem moveAt: aPoint
  @var{aPoint}, coordinates where to displace ``item''

  @result{} displace ``item'' to the given position
  @example
point moveAt: 2@@1.
@end example
@end defmethod

@c  Explain how this differs from point: above and position: below. I see
@c  that position: applies only to value items pinned in the sketch.
@c  point: applies to a DrGPointItem or DrGPointFreeItem.
@c  moveAt: applies to them and also a DrGPointOnCurveItem, in which case
@c  it moves to a point with the same abscissa as the parameter item.

@subsection Straight or curved line
@deftypemethod DrGCurveItem <Float> abscissaOf: aPoint
  @var{aPoint}, coordinates (x,y) of a point

  @result{} number in [0@tie{};@tie{}1] curvilinear abscissa of ``aPoint''
  on ``curve''
  @example
a := curve abscissaOf: 2@@1.
@end example
@end deftypemethod

@deftypemethod DrGCurveItem <Point> pointAt: anAbscissa
  @var{anAbscissa}, number in [0@tie{};@tie{}1]

  @result{} coordinates of a point on ``curve'' with curvilinear 
  abscissa equal to  ``anAbscissa''
  @example
myPoint := curve pointAt: 0.5.
@end example
@end deftypemethod

@deftypemethod DrGCurveItem <Boolean> contains: aPoint
  @var{aPoint}, coordinates (x, y) of a point

  @result{} boolean indicating if the  ``aPoint'' is on ``curve''
  @example
(curve contains: 0@@1) ifTrue: [^ 'Yes!']
  ifFalse: [^ 'No!'].
@end example
@end deftypemethod

@c  All cases must be covered or an error may result.

@subsection Line, ray, segment, vector

@deftypemethod DrGDirectionItem <Point> origin
  @result{} coordinates of the origin of this item
  @example
item origin.
@end example
@end deftypemethod

@deftypemethod DrGDirectionItem <Vector> direction
  @result{} vector (x, y) indicating the item direction
  @example
v := item direction.
slope := v y / v x.
@end example
@end deftypemethod

@deftypemethod DrGDirectionItem <Vector> normal
  @result{} unit vector normal to the item direction
  @example
n := item normal.
@end example
@end deftypemethod

@subsection Segment

@deftypemethod DrGSegmentItem <Float> item length
  @result{} length of the segment
  @example
segment := canvas segment: 0@@0 to: 5@@5.
l := segment length
@end example
@end deftypemethod

@deftypemethod DrGSegmentItem <Point> extremity1
  @result{} coordinates of the extremity 1
  @example
segment := canvas segment: 0@@0 to: 5@@5.
p := segment extremity1.
@end example
@end deftypemethod


@deftypemethod DrGSegmentItem <Point> extremity2
  @result{} coordinates of the extremity 2
  @example
segment := canvas segment: 0@@0 to: 5@@5.
p := segment extremity2
@end example
@end deftypemethod

@deftypemethod DrGSegmentItem <Point> middle
  @result{} coordinates of the middle of the segment
  @example
segment := canvas segment: 0@@0 to: 5@@5.
m := segment middle
@end example
@end deftypemethod

@subsection Circle, arc, polygon

@deftypemethod DrGCircleItem|DrGArcItem <Point> center
  @result{} coordinates of the centre of the circle or arc
  @example
c := item center.
@end example
@end deftypemethod

@deftypemethod DrGCircleItem|DrGArcItem <Float> radius
  @result{} radius of the circle or arc
  @example
r := item radius
@end example
@end deftypemethod

@deftypemethod DrGCircleItem|DrGArcItem|DrGPolygonItem <Float> length
  @result{} length of the circle, arc or polygon
  @example
l := arc length
@end example
@end deftypemethod

@subsection Value

@deftypemethod DrGValueItem <Float> valueItem
  @result{} value of this item
  @example
n1 := item2 valueItem.
n2 := item2 valueItem.
n1 + n2.
@end example
@end deftypemethod

@c  Class DrGValueItem
@c  Subclass of DrGMathItem
@c  No class documentation
@c  What objects does this apply to?
@c  Experiment shows that it does not apply to points or to coordinates of
@c  points. What then?
@c  Looking in the class hierarchy shows that its subclasses represent
@c  angles, computed numeric values, scripts, and ValueItems.

@defmethod DrGValueItem valueItem: v
  @var{v}, decimal number

  @result{} modify the value of a free value item
  @example
item valueItem: 5.2.
@end example
@end defmethod


@defmethod DrGValueItem position: aPoint
  @var{aPoint}, coordinates (x, y) of a point

  @result{} displace at the screen the position of a value item
  @example
item position: 0.5@@2.
@end example
@end defmethod


@subsection Angle

@deftypemethod DrGAngleItem <Integer> degreeAngle
  @result{} measure of this angle item in degrees
  @example
angle1 := a1 degreeAngle.
@end example
@end deftypemethod


@deftypemethod DrGAngleItem <Float> radianAngle
  @result{} measure of this angle item in radians
  @example
angle1 := a1 radianAngle.
@end example
@end deftypemethod
